These are Doctor Who fans — arguably some
of the most passionate fans of any show.
And this year, they’re especially excited
because, for the first time in the show’s
55-year history, the Doctor won’t be played
by a white British man — it’ll be a woman.
“Oh brilliant!”
This move adds Doctor Who to an influx of
sci-fi fantasy franchises who have already
put women at the helm.
But this new woman Doctor is expected to have
a trait that those other heroines don’t
have — a sense of humor.
“This is gonna be fun.”
For those of us not as invested in the show
as this guy — Doctor Who is the story of
a mysterious alien being (known as the Doctor)
who travels through time and space having
adventures and fighting evil.
But the Doctor has one particularly special
ability — when the character is mortally
wounded, the doctor can regenerate into a
new body.
The Doctor has had 13 different faces over
the years — all white, British men.
This is one of the first episodes of Doctor
Who, from 1965...
The Doctor was an eccentric old man who often
relied on his more courageous companions to
get him out of some sticky situations.
Support me, dear boy.
In fact, in early concept notes from one of
the show’s co-creators, the character of
the Doctor was described as “a frail old
man lost in time and space.”
But as time went on, and different actors
rotated through the role, the Doctor went
from being a frail trickster to a male hero
archetype.
The Third Doctor in particular played the
role as an “action hero”
“Violent exercise makes me hungry.
Don’t you agree?”
Fast forward to the Tenth Doctor, and the
action hero traits had become baked into the
character...
“Leave this planet and never return — what
do you say?
Yes.
All well then.
Thanks for that!”
But there’s one particular personality trait
that stayed from the beginning...
The Doctor has a gleeful, almost childlike
personality.
He’s a hero with a sense of humor - which
makes the character fun and compelling to
watch.
But that kind of character complexity has been
typically reserved for male heroes.
Female superheroes are very much
pressured to be taken seriously because there
are so few of them, they have to do well.
In 2014, the last time good data was available,
only 14% of mainstream sci-fi films had a woman
protagonist.
Women are not only vastly underrepresented
in sci-fi fantasy films, they’re often
restricted to generic superhero personalities.
If I think about the leading female
superhero... think about the Wonder Woman
film...She's powerful she's strong … But
she's not a funny funny character.
She laughs, but doesn't crack jokes, she doesn't have banter in the
same way that male superheroes can do.
That seriousness is consistent across most
woman characters on-screen.
Take a look at this scene between Guardian
of the Galaxy’s heroine, Gamora, and one
of the film’s villains, Nebula.
Gamora puts up a pretty awesome fight.
But compare that to Peter, the film’s male
hero...
notice the difference?
There’s also Black Widow from The Avengers
whose whole personality is built around being
stoic.
And Katniss Everdeen, who can do some serious
damage with a bow and arrow but barely ever
drops her steely persona.
Of course, there are some examples of funny
heroines in film and television.
One of the earliest is Buffy the Vampire Slayer.
These examples are still rare on-screen, but
there is one medium where heroines have more
complex personalities...
Female characters who do humor, do very well
in comics...
Squirrel Girl, Kamala Khan, Gwen Pool.
From a financial point of view, it is less
of a risk.
Because there's less of a pressure
on a female-led title to do well, there's more
room for comedy, there's more room for humor.
It’s this scarcity of women superheroes
in film and television that makes the new
female Doctor’s role even more impactful.
This woman doctor is not only expected to
be a great witty hero traveling through space
like her male predecessors, she could also
push the boundaries of what a woman hero can
be...
To have a female Doctor, that's a win for
a lot of us.
Women, young girls will get to see someone
that looks like them
be smart and interesting and funny and that
is incredibly important.
So even if you’re not one of the millions
of people worldwide who watches Doctor Who,
next time you see an awesome new woman superhero,
you might have the Doctor to thank.